---
title: 0015 - Entering and Leaving
topic: mouse
layout: post
description: Tracking a mouse over and off a GTK widget - a D language tutorial.
author: Ron Tarrant

---

## 0015 - Entering and Leaving

Today’s code also takes place in an unadorned *TestRigWindow*, not because *Button*s would confuse things, but because we only need a window to illustrate the `ENTER_NOTIFY` and `LEAVE_NOTIFY` events, what happens when the mouse pointer enters or leaves a designated area.

The example uses a `MainWindow` derivative, but it can be used with any object derived from a `Widget`, a `Button`, even a `MenuItem`, or if a container of some kind. Pretty much anything you need to do with it.

Here’s the code file: [Mouse Enter and Leave example](https://github.com/rontarrant/gtkDcoding/blob/master/005_mouse/mouse_005_03_enter_leave.d)

And let’s have a look…

### Constructor Changes

	this()
	{
		// window
		super(title);
		addOnDestroy(delegate void(Widget w) { quitApp(); } );
		
		// make the window sensitive to mouse clicking (any button)
		addOnEnterNotify(&onEvent);
		addOnLeaveNotify(&onEvent);
		
		// Show the window and its contents...
		showAll();
		
	} // this()

At first glance, it looks like we’re setting up a signal chain like we did before, but these signals won’t be firing at the same time. As you might expect, one fires as the mouse enters the window, the other as it leaves.

And notice, too, that both signals are set up to trigger the same callback, `onEvent()`, so let’s have a look at that:

	public bool onEvent(Event event, Widget widget)
	{
		bool value = false;
		string article;
		
		if(event.type() == EventType.ENTER_NOTIFY)
		{
			article = "an ";
		}
		else
		{
			article = "a ";
		}
		
		writeln(messageStart, article, event.type(), " event.");

		return(value);
		
	} // onEvent()

Well, ain’t that fancy. This function even takes care of the grammar. The `messageStart`, defined at the top of the `TestRigWindow` class, looks like this:

	string messageStart = "We've experienced ";

And after `onEvent()`’s if’s, and’s and but’s, we get messages like:

We’ve experienced an `ENTER_NOTIFY` event.

or

We’ve experienced a `LEAVE_NOTIFY` event.

Okay, that’s all we need to look at here. Let’s move on.

### Mouse Pointer Tracking

For our second code file today, [Mouse Tracker example](https://github.com/rontarrant/gtkDcoding/blob/master/005_mouse/mouse_005_04_tracker.d).

In the constructor, we hook up the `MOTION_NOTIFY` signal by calling `addOnMotionNotify()`:

	this()
	{
		super(title);
		addOnDestroy(delegate void(Widget w) { quitApp(); } );
		
		// make the callback sensitive to mouse movement
		addOnMotionNotify(&onMotion);
		
		showAll();
		
	} // this()

And the `onMotion()` callback does the tracking:

	public bool onMotion(Event event, Widget widget)
	{
		if(event.type == EventType.MOTION_NOTIFY)
		{
			writeln("x = ", event.motion.x, " y = ", event.motion.y);
		}

		return(true);
		
	} // onMotion()

Yup, you’ve got to dig down a little to find those coordinates. As you may imagine, this would give you raw data for drawing with the mouse or perhaps for pulling a noodle from one node to another.

### Conclusion

And there we have it, two more examples of harnessing Events to do our bidding.

Until next time…


<BR>
<div style="float: left;">
	<a href="https://gtkdcoding.com/2019/03/01/0014-reacting-to-mouse-events.html">Previous: Mouse Events</a>
</div>
<div style="float: right;">
	<a href="https://gtkdcoding.com/2019/03/08/0016-scroll-pointer-all.html">Next: Scrollwheel, etc.</a>
</div>
<BR>
