---
title: 0002 - OOP Test Rig Breakdown
layout: post
description: Introduction to the OOP version of the GTK TestRig window - a D language tutorial.
author: Ron Tarrant

---

## 0002 - OOP Test Rig Breakdown

The code covered in this post is available [here](https://github.com/rontarrant/gtkDcoding/blob/master/001_window/test_rig_001_02_oop.d)
When you look at the imperative test rig alongside the OOP version, it becomes quickly apparent that the difference is mostly about code organization.

### main()

The changes start in the **main()** function:

	void main(string[] args)
	{
		TestRigWindow testRigWindow;

		Main.init(args);
		testRigWindow = new TestRigWindow("Test Rig");
		
		// give control over to gtkD.
		Main.run();
		
	} // main()

On line 2 of **main()**, the window declaration is quite different because instead of instantiating the *MainWindow* class directly, there’s a derived class called *TestRigWindow*. We also move any calls to TestRigWindow functions to the TestRigWindow class's constructor. Everything else in **main()** is the same.

### quitApp()

**quitApp()** is no longer a standalone function as it’s been incorporated into the *TestRigWindow* class which looks like this:

	class TestRigWindow : MainWindow
	{
		this(string title)
		{
			super(title);
			addOnDestroy(&quitApp);

			sayHi();
		
			// Show the window and its contents...
			showAll();
				
		} // this() CONSTRUCTOR
		
		void quitApp(Widget widget)
		{
			writeln("Bye.");
			Main.quit();
			
		} // quitApp()
	
		void sayHi()
		{
			writeln("Hello GtkD OOP.");
		}
	
	} // class myAppWindow

The first function is the constructor. D uses **this()** instead of  the class name (like Java) or **construct()** (like PHP) and inside we:

 - call **super()**, a shorthand for calling the parent class’s constructor,
 - while passing along the window’s title, and
 - hook up the window’s close button.

You’ll notice that connecting the *onDestroy* signal is done differently here. In the imperative version, because **quitApp()** is external to **main()**, we have to preserve *quitApp*’s scope so it doesn’t disappear on us before we can use it. But in the OOP version, the syntax is simplified because we don’t need to worry about scope. As long as the class object exists, everything within it will exist as well. This simplification of syntax makes our job easier, although it’ll get difficult again under certain circumstances. I’ll talk about that in later posts.

Another thing you’ll notice is that *TestRigWindow*’s **sayHi()** function has taken the place of a simple **writeln()** call in the imperative version of **main()**. We could have left it where it was, but this way all functions are part of the *TestRigWindow* class and there’s a certain orderliness to that.

Now let’s talk about the next code example.

## Window Resized

There’s only one new line of code here and it appears in the *TestRigWindow*’s constructor:

	setSizeRequest(300, 400);

You may wonder why size is being requested instead of demanded, but that’s a question for the original GTK+ devs. I have no idea, but it really doesn’t matter.

The numbers are, of course, the x and y dimensions of the window we’re opening.

As with all examples, to compile:

	dmd -de -w -m64 -Lgtkd.lib <filename>.d

## Conclusion

So, now we have two test rigs and we’ve looked at how to size a window to exact specifications. That gives us a foundation to build from in the coming posts.

Until next time when we take an initial look at GUI buttons, happy D-coding and may the widgets be with you.
